---
layout: page
title: Landscape
---

# eWaterCycle Landscape Overview

*The eWatercycle project aims to overcome the challenge of locality in
hydrological models using a Community Multi-Model environment. In eWaterCycle
we will build an e-Infrastructure that will allow quick and safe inclusion of
sub-models and model concepts into global hydrological models, leading to better
understanding of the global hydrological cycle. In this document we review the
landscape of state-of-the-art hydrological research. We examine overall related
projects and platforms that we are inspired by and that we would potentially
collaborate with, as well as software, models and databases that we would like
to use, or reference in our project (or at least be aware of).*

## Overall related projects

**[CSDMS](https://csdms.colorado.edu/wiki/Main_Page):** The Community Surface
Dynamics Modeling System is a group of experts dealing with research about the
Earth’s surface. The group support the development, sharing of models to explain
Earth’s surface processes by disseminating integrated software. They mainly
deals with movements of fluids and the flux of sediments and their basins.

**[CUASHI HIS](http://his.cuahsi.org):**  The Consortium of Universities for the
Advancement of Hydrological Science developed a suite of applications to enable
hydrological researchers to share their data. The suite is made of three
components: the HydroServer, the HydroCatalog and the HydroDesktop. The
HydroServer provides access to the data, the HydroCatalog provides search
functions for data discovery and the HyroDesktop app allows modeling and
analysis of the data locally.

**[Hydroshare](https://www.hydroshare.org):** Community platform to share data,
models and code. Operated by CUASHI HIS. Can be used to share, access, visualize
and manipulate a broad set of hydrologic data types and models. Roughly consists
of file storage to share resources (data/publications/code/executables/ etc),
and added functionalities like metadata descriptions, data access API, DOI data
publication and an apps library (e.g., jupyterhub notebook, online SWAT,
HydroshareGIS and others).

**[The Earth System Grid Federation (ESGF)](https://esgf.llnl.gov/):**
Peer-to-Peer (P2P) enterprise system is a interagency and international
collaboration that provides software infrastructure for the management,
dissemination, and analysis of model output and observational data. ESGF's
primary goal is to facilitate advancements in Earth System Science. Users can
apply for access to the data, i.e., they are provided a username and password.
Users can request a persistent identifier to be assigned to the dataset that
they upload. ESGF "core" metadata includes mandatory and optional fields that
are needed to search and download data throughout the ESGF system. These fields
are not specific to any scientific discipline, rather they are common to any
discipline that intends to leverage the ESGF infrastructure. Core metadata
fields are defined in the ESGF meta-schema file esgf.xml, which is always used
for validation whenever metadata records are published.

**[Aqueduct Global Flood Analyzer](http://floods.wri.org/#/):** The Aqueduct
Global Flood Analyzer is a web-based interactive platform which measures river
flood impacts by urban damage, affected GDP, and affected population at the
country, state, and river basin scale across the globe, as well as 120 cities.

**[OpenStreams](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012EGUGA..14.3953S/abstract):**
A collection of
building blocks for integrated Hydrological models. Integrated modeling means to
connect multiple models for different domains (e.g., surface water domein and
groundwater domain) so the interaction processes between the domains will be
taken into account. The aim is to allow integrated modelling, promote usage of
model tools in different frameworks and settings,and  provide applications for
model coupling.

**[ESMF](https://github.com/esmf-org/esmf):** Consortium of US
institutes (NASA, National Weather Center, etc.). Hosted by the university of
Colorado. They deal with Earth Sciences, predominantly oceanography and
atmospheric physics. Mostly focussed on HPC (native interfaces).

**[GEOGLOWS](https://www.arcgis.com/apps/Cascade/index.html?appid=414730116a3c4c119b80ec9d1727ab74):**
A framework that uses RAPID (Routing Application for Parallel computatIon of
Discharge), and the ECMWF (European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts)
forecasts to map streams. The system currently contains more than 200,000
streams throughout North and South America, Africa, and South Asia. It produces
a new 15-day ensemble streamflow forecast for each stream every day. The
framework also computed a 35-year streamflow history for each stream. It uses a
web server application for visualization, and working towards an improved
streamflow visualization which will allow users to quickly identify areas of
concern in a watershed at each time step in the forecast. Also contains a
validation toolbox.

**[GloFAS](http://www.globalfloods.eu/):** The Global Flood Awareness System
(GloFAS), jointly developed by the European Commission and the European Centre
for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), is independent of administrative and
political boundaries. It couples state-of-the art weather forecasts with a
hydrological model and with its continental scale set-up it provides downstream
countries with information on upstream river conditions as well as continental
and global overviews. GloFAS produces daily flood forecasts in a pre-operational
manner since June 2011.

**[GLOFRIM](https://github.com/openearth/glofrim):** Globally Applicable
Framework for Integrated Hydrological-Hydrodynamic Modelling. Developed by
Jannis M. Hoch (Utrecht University). A platform to couple (chain) models.
Currently couples PCR-GLOBWB with Delft3D Flexible Mesh (Deltares) or
LISFLOOD-FP (University of Bristol). Uses BMI to facilitate the coupling, thus
models have to be BMI-compatible.

**[Catch X](https://earthwatch.org.uk/our-science/research-topics/catchx):**
The Catch X open data platform will improve access, or provide access for the first
time, to standard water balance information at a local catchment level around
the world. Catch X is a partnership between the University of Leeds, Earthwatch,
WWF UK, WWF South Africa, Marks & Spencer, SSBN Ltd. and Richard Carter and
Associates.

## Related efforts in other domains

**[Evidencio](http://www.evidencio.com):** Project to share medical decision
support models with researchers and (especially) clinical practitioners.

**[Codeocean](https://codeocean.com/):** A cloud-based computational
reproducibility platform that provides researchers and developers an easy way to
share, discover and run code. The platform provides open access to the code and
the data. Users can execute all published code without installing anything on
their personal computer. Everything runs in the cloud on CPUs or GPUs. It is
possible to change parameters, modify the code, upload data, etc. It is free of
charge for an individual researcher, but does have a cost for teams or
institutions, as it has a business approach.

**[E3SM](https://e3sm.org/):** Energy Exascale Earth System Model. Earth
system modeling, simulation, and prediction project that optimizes the use of
DOE laboratory resources. The platform aims to integrate model development with
leading-edge computational advances to lead ultra-high-resolution modeling with
throughput for coupled Earth system simulations. They aim to bridge the gap in
scales and processes and use ensemble modeling to quantify uncertainty. They
focus on 3 scientific “drivers”:
- Water cycle (hydrological cycle and its sensitivity to model resolution and
  forcing);
- Biogeochemistry and energy (biogeochemical cycles interaction with Earth
  system components and their influence on energy-sector decisions);
- Cryosphere-Ocean (rapid changes in cryospheric systems and their contribution
  to sea level rise and coastal vulnerability).

Effort is also invested in computational research so to make effective use of
upcoming DOE exascale computing platforms. Data is open and available through
the ESGF archives
([data description](https://e3sm.org/data/get-e3sm-data/data-description/)).

**[MINT](http://mint-project.info/):** The MINT (Model INTegration) project aims
to integrate models from separate disciplines, including geosciences,
agriculture, economics, and social sciences. It uses artificial intelligence
technologies to assist modelers by automating and improving important aspects of
model integration. It incorporates three key innovations: 1) Semantic
technologies to address model and data discovery and to bridge the heterogeneity
of model requirements and assumptions; 2) Automated planning to resolve data
mismatches by including data transformations; and 3) Machine learning to improve
model parameterization through the extraction of more accurate data from remote
sensing and other sources and search optimization.

**[Wekeo](https://www.wekeo.eu/):** The European Organisation for the
Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT), the European Centre for
Medium Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) and Mercator Ocean have launched the
WEkEO Copernicus Data and Information Access Service. Wekeo offers Copernicus
Data, i.e., EU environmental monitoring data,  for free download and features
cloud–based hosted processing and tools allowing users to transform the data and
services.

**[Google Earth Engine](https://earthengine.google.com/):** Earth Engine is a
platform for scientific analysis and visualization of geospatial datasets. It
hosts satellite imagery and stores it in a public data archive that includes
historical earth images going back more than forty years. It also provides APIs
and other tools to enable the analysis of large datasets.

## Metadata schemes

**[Dublin Core Metadata Initiative (DCMI)](http://www.dublincore.org/groups/sam/):**
Organization supporting innovation in metadata design and best practices across
the metadata ecology. The [element set](http://dublincore.org/documents/1998/09/dces/)
for metadata curation includes 15 elements that covers the basic characteristics
of any data set.

**[Datacite](https://www.datacite.org/):** DataCite is a non-profit organisation
that provides DOIs for research data. The goal is to help the research community
locate, identify, and cite research data. They support the creation and
allocation of DOIs and accompanying metadata. Datacite also provides services
that support the enhanced search and discovery of research content. Their
metadata scheme covers different types of data and software.

**[CodeMeta](https://github.com/codemeta/codemeta):** - CodeMeta contributors
are creating a minimal metadata schema for science software and code, in JSON
and XML. The goal of CodeMeta is to create a concept vocabulary that can be used
to standardize the exchange of software metadata across repositories and
organizations. CodeMeta started by comparing the software metadata used across
multiple repositories, which resulted in the CodeMeta Metadata Crosswalk. That
crosswalk was then used to generate a set of software metadata concepts, which
were arranged into a JSON-LD context for serialization.

## Related software

*Instead of reinventing the wheel, we would like to use and adapt as much
software and toolkits as possible, assuming it is open-source, updated and
maintained.*

**[OpenDA](https://www.openda.org/):** Software that allows a fast and effective
integration of observations and models through data assimilation. OpenDA is a
generic environment for data assimilation tasks like parameter calibration and
measurement filtering. It provides a platform that allows an easy interchange of
algorithms and models.

**[AMUSE](http://www.amusecode.org/)/[OMUSE](https://github.com/omuse-geoscience/omuse/):**
Software framework for multi-physics/multi-scale simulations. AMUSE/OMUSE
provides an homogeneous environment to interface with existing numerical
simulation codes. AMUSE was developed for astrophysical applications, while its
offshoot OMUSE was developed for the oceanographic domain. They share a common
framework code base.

**[OpenMI](https://sites.google.com/a/openmi.org/home/):** An open modeling
interface, originally developed to facilitate the simulation of interacting
environmental processes. Now used to exchange between models and software
components. Can be applied to linking any combination of models, databases and
analytical and visualisation tools. The interface is not maintained
anymore/expired.

**[Renku](https://renku.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html):** A scalable &
secure open software platform designed to foster multidisciplinary data
(science) collaboration. The platform uses Python-based command-line interface
(CLI) and Python API. Renku records the commands into a CWL to allow for
reproducible analysis. Still in very early beta version.

**[SILK](http://silkframework.org/):** The Linked Data Integration Framework.
Open source framework for integrating heterogeneous data sources. Use cases
include generating links between datasets, linking data sources, and applying
simple data transformations to structured data sources. It can be used to create
linked water-related datasets, to enrich datasets with additional information
and/or descriptions of terms. Basically can be used as a source for metadata
about water-related data sets.

**[Cylc](https://cylc.github.io/):** A workflow engine for cycling systems.
It orchestrates distributed suites of interdependent cycling tasks that may
continue on indefinitely.

**[DART](http://www.image.ucar.edu/DAReS/DART/):** Data assimilation toolkit

**[DAPPER](https://github.com/nansencenter/DAPPER):** Data assimilation toolkit
in python

**[EMPIRE](http://www.met.reading.ac.uk/%7Edarc/empire/index.php):** Data
assimilation toolkit

**[WHIST](http://hype.sourceforge.net/WHIST/):** WHIST is a tool from SMHI to
extract and repurpose information to create input files for hydrological models,
including the Hype Model, from different types of databases. WHIST is the core
tool when setting up a hydrological model for new geographical domains or
changing model resolution. From the information of topographic databases, for
example, WHIST can delineate the sub-basins, and the linking (routing) between
them.

**[Delft Flood Early Warning System
(Delft-FEWS)](https://www.deltares.nl/en/software/flood-forecasting-system-delft-fews-2/):**
Expert software to build hydrological forecasting systems. Originally, it was
developed as a flood forecasting and warning system, recently it resulted into
an open data handling platform. Delft-FEWS is composed by several modules, which
allows to build a hydrological forecasting system customizable to the
requirements of specific organizations.

**[FUSE](https://github.com/ICHydro/r_fuse):** Framework for Understanding
Structural Errors (R package), dedicated for hydrological modelling.

**[HydroMAD](http://hydromad.catchment.org/):** Hydrological Model Assessment
and Development (R package). A modelling framework for environmental hydrology:
water balance accounting and flow routing in spatially aggregated catchments. It
supports simulation, estimation, assessment and visualisation of flow response
to time series of rainfall and other drivers. [Github
link](https://github.com/josephguillaume/hydromad).

**[HydroStats](https://pypi.org/project/hydrostats/):** Tools for use in
comparison studies, specifically in hydrology. The library contains
preprocessing tools, visualization, a package dependency
([HydroErr](https://github.com/waderoberts123/HydroErr)) with more than 60 error
metrics. Also provides a library of metrics to measure forecast, i.e., to
compare ensembles with observations. The library is written in Python,
well-documented and available via github. It is still in its prerelease version.

**[Emma](https://github.com/nlesc-sherlock/emma/):** Ansible playbook to create
a cluster with GlusterFS, Docker, Spark and JupyterHub services.

## Related ontologies/controlled vocabularies

**HyFO:** Models “containers” of water, identifying the common concepts of
container and water body. The ontology has been recently extended to
characterize also hydrological flow processes [Stephen,
2017](http://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2017/7763/pdf/LIPIcs-COSIT-2017-7.pdf).
No available working link to ontology.

**Surface Water Ontology:** Ontology composed by two modules: the dry module and
the wet module. The dry module expresses the semantics of ground features, which
exist regardless of the presence of water. The wet module reuses some dry module
features to express the semantics of hydro features. [Sinha,
2014](http://www.semantic-web-journal.net/system/files/swj675.pdf). No available
working link to ontology.

**[Water ML](http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/waterml):** A common
conceptual feature model for describing typical features of the hydrology domain
using established models and patterns endorsed by WMO and UNESCO.

**[CSDMS standard names](https://github.com/csdms/standard_names_registry):** -
set of cross-domain naming conventions for describing process models, data sets
and their associated variables. CSDMS Standard Names were developed to
facilitate semantic mediation, i.e., name matching, between models and/of data
sets within the CSDMS modeling framework. The  CSDMS Standard Names is further
developed in the context of the MINT project and is now called the [GeoScience
Ontology](http://www.geoscienceontology.org/).

**[SWEET](https://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/SWEET/?p=summary):** The
Semantic Web for Earth and Environmental Terminology is a mature foundational
ontology that contains over 6000 concepts organized in 200 ontologies
represented in OWL. Top level concepts include Representation (math, space,
science, time, data), Realm (Ocean, Land Surface, Terrestrial Hydroshere,
Atmosphere, etc.), Phenomena (macro-scale ecological and physical), Processes
(micro-scale physical, biological, chemical, and mathematical), Human Activities
(Decision, Commerce, Jurisdiction, Environmental, Research). Originally
developed by NASA.

**[QUDT](https://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/QUDT):** The Quantity,
Unit, Dimension and Type collection of ontologies define the base classes
properties, and restrictions used for modeling physical quantities, units of
measure, and their dimensions in various measurement systems.

**[OM](http://www.foodvoc.org/page/om-1.8):** The ontology of measurements (OM)
contains thousands of terms on quantities and units pertaining to things like
length, weight and energy value – from metres and inches to spoons and
millilitres per liter.

**[OntoSoft](http://www.ontosoft.org/ontology.html):** Ontology for scientific
software metadata. It is part of the OntoSoft project, which aims to promote
knowledge sharing about the software developed for geosciences. The ontology is
the basis for the design of the user interface in the OntoSoft portal, the
organization of the underlying knowledge base, and the integration with other
software repositories.

## Notebook platforms

**[SciServer Compute](https://www.sciserver.org/compute-images/):** big data
access for SkyServer.

**[SWAN](https://swan.web.cern.ch/):** Service for Web based ANalysis by CERN.

## Geospatial visualizations

**[Regis](https://github.com/ReGIS-org/regis):** Re-GIS (Research Environment
for GIS) is an environment for visualizing data on maps. It was developed by the
Netherlands eScience Center and TNO.

**[Cesiumjs](https://cesiumjs.org/):** An open-source JavaScript library for
world-class 3D mapping of geospatial data.

**[TerriaJS](http://terria.io/):** GIS data catalogue from Australia

**[GeoWeb](https://www.knmi.nl/research/observations-data-technology/projects/geoweb-the-next-generation-web-based-tooling-for-monitoring-the-atmosphere):**
Web-based visualization for NetCDF
Data. In turn based on [ADAGUC](http://adaguc.knmi.nl/) - OpenDAP/WMS server and
client.

## Opendap/WMS/WCS servers

**[THREDDS](https://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/thredds/current/tds/):** The
THREDDS Data Server (TDS) is a web server that provides metadata and data access
for scientific datasets, using a variety of remote data access protocols.

**[ESGF](https://esgf.llnl.gov/):** the Earth System Grid Federation
Peer-to-Peer (P2P) enterprise system is a collaboration that develops, deploys
and maintains software infrastructure for the management, dissemination, and
analysis of model output and observational data.


## Friendly Neighbourhood Hydrological Models

*Hydrological models that we would like to include in eWaterCycle (but see
cartoon for unwanted outcome, **credit:** [xkcd](https://xkcd.com/927/)).*

![center-aligned-image](/assets/standards.png){: .align-center}

**[PCR-GLOBWB](http://www.globalhydrology.nl/models/pcr-globwb-2-0/):** PCRaster
Global Water Balance is a large-scale, grid-based hydrological model intended
for global to regional studies. Resolution of 0.5deg and 5 arcmin in space and
days in time. [Github link.](https://github.com/UU-Hydro/PCR-GLOBWB_model)

**[WFLOW](https://wflow.readthedocs.io/):** Hydrological simulations
platform that includes various hydrological models (also allows to introduce new
models using the framework). The different models share the same structure but
are fairly different with respect to the conceptualisation. The shared software
framework includes the basic maps (dem, land-use, soil, etc) and the
hydrological routing via the kinematic wave. The Python class framework also
exposes the models as an API and is based on the PCRaster. WFLOW includes links
to BMI, OpenMI and OpenDAP. [Github link.](https://github.com/openstreams/wflow)

**[HYPE](http://hypecode.smhi.se/):** HYdrological Predictions for the
Environment. Hydrological model for simulation of water and water quality over
time. [Code link.](https://sourceforge.net/projects/hype/)

**[WALRUS](https://www.wur.nl/en/Research-Results/Chair-groups/Environmental-Sciences/Hydrology-and-Quantitative-Water-Management-Group/Research/WALRUS-1.htm):**
Wageningen Lowland Runoff Simulator. [Github link
(R).](https://github.com/ClaudiaBrauer/WALRUS)

**[SUMMA](https://ral.ucar.edu/projects/summa):** Structure for Unifying
Multiple Modeling Alternatives. An hydrologic modeling framework that can be
used for the systematic analysis of alternative model conceptualizations with
respect to flux parameterizations, spatial configurations, and numerical
solution techniques. Different modeling approaches can then be implemented
within the structural core, enabling a controlled and systematic analysis of
alternative modeling options. [Github link.](https://github.com/NCAR/summa)


## Related datasets

*Datasets used in hydrological modeling. These datasets are specific and curated
and include metadata. Some of the datasets comply with the
[FAIR](https://www.go-fair.org/fair-principles/) principles*

**[GEFS](https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/data-access/model-data/model-datasets/global-ensemble-forecast-system-gefs):**
The Global Ensemble Forecast System is a weather forecast model made up of 21
separate forecasts, or ensemble members.

**[GFS](https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/data-access/model-data/model-datasets/global-forcast-system-gfs):**
The Global Forecast System is a weather forecast model produced by the National
Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP).

**[GLiM](https://www.clisap.de/research/b:-climate-manifestations-and-impacts/crg-chemistry-of-natural-aqueous-solutions/global-lithological-map/):**
Global surface lithology at 1 km

**[GLHYMPS](http://www.uni-frankfurt.de/45218039/Global_Irrigation_Map):**
Global map of irrigated areas

**[SoilGrids1km](https://soilgrids.org/#!/?layer=TAXNWRB_250m&vector=1):**
Global soils and soil properties at 1 km

**[GRanD](http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/data/set/grand-v1-dams-rev01):** The
Global Reservoir and Dam Database

**[HYDRO1k](https://doi.org/10.5066/F77P8WN0):** 1km hydrological DEM and
drainage network

**[HydroSHEDS](http://www.hydrosheds.org/):** Hydrological data and maps based
on SHuttle Elevation Derivatives at multiple Scales

**[MIRCA2000](http://www.uni-frankfurt.de/45218023/MIRCA):** Global dataset of
monthly irrigated and rainfed crop areas around the year 2000

**[CRU](https://crudata.uea.ac.uk/cru/data/hrg/):** Monthly meteorological
forcing from observations 1901-current

**[ERA-40
1.25deg](http://apps.ecmwf.int/datasets/data/era40-daily/levtype=sfc/):** Daily
meteorological forcing from ECMRWF reanalysis 1958-2001

**[ERA-Interim 0.8deg](https://www.ecmwf.int/en/forecasts/dataset/ecmwf-reanalysis-interim):**
Daily meteorological forcing from ECMRWF reanalysis 1979-current

**[GPCP](https://www.esrl.noaa.gov/psd/data/gridded/data.gpcp.html):** Global
precipitation climatology project: daily, monthly, and climatology data sets at
18 composed from combinations of multi-satellite data (microwave, infrared),
6000 gauges and sounding observations

**[MERRA](https://gmao.gsfc.nasa.gov/reanalysis/MERRA/):** Daily meteorological
forcing from the NASA Goddard Earth Observing System Data Assimilation System.

**[NOMANDS](https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/nomads):** NOAA National Operational Model
Archive and Distribution System.  NOMADS is a network of data servers using
technologies to access and integrate model and other data stored in
geographically distributed repositories in heterogeneous formats. Enables
sharing and comparing of model results and is a major collaborative effort,
spanning multiple government agencies and academic institutions. The data
available include model input and numerical weather prediction gridded output
from NCEP, and global climate models (GCMs) and simulations from GFDL and other
international institutions

**[EWA](http://www.bafg.de/GRDC/EN/04_spcldtbss/42_EWA/ewa_node.html):**
European Water Archive (catchment data)

**[FLUXNET](https://daac.ornl.gov/cgi-bin/dataset_lister.pl?p=9):** Water vapor,
energy, and CO2land-atmosphere ﬂuxes from towers

**[GRACE](https://grace.jpl.nasa.gov/):** Gravity recovery and climate
experiment

**[GRDC](http://www.bafg.de/GRDC/EN/Home/homepage_node.html):** Global Runoff
Data Center

**[ISMN](https://ismn.geo.tuwien.ac.at/):** Global network of soil moisture data

**[MOPEX](http://www.nws.noaa.gov/ohd/mopex/mo_datasets.htm):** US catchment
data

**[RIVDIS](https://daac.ornl.gov/RIVDIS/guides/rivdis_guide.html):** Global
River Discharge 1807-1991

**[NASA Global Change Master Directory
(GCMD)](https://gcmd.nasa.gov/index.html):** Earth science dataset and service
descriptions, which cover subject areas within the Earth and environmental
sciences. Users may perform searches through the Directory’s website using
controlled keywords, free-text searches, map/date searches or any combination of
these

**[NASA Global Hydrology Resource Center (GHRC)
DAAC](https://ghrc.nsstc.nasa.gov/home/):** A comprehensive active archive of
both data and knowledge augmentation services, with a focus on hazardous
weather, its governing dynamical and physical processes, and associated
applications. Focuses on lightning, tropical cyclones and storm-induced hazards
through integrated collections of satellite, airborne, and in-situ data sets.

**[USGS (US Geological Survey) Science Data
Catalog](https://data.usgs.gov/datacatalog/#fq=dataType%3A(collection%20OR%20non-collection)&q=*%3A*):**
(near) Real-time data and information on current conditions and earth
observations

**[Australian Geoscience Data Cube
(AGDC)](https://github.com/GeoscienceAustralia/agdc)**
