---
layout: post
title: "You can now download ERA5 data over the command line. Here is why that is awesome."
image: /assets/ERA5_timeline.png
authors: "Barbara Vreede"
---

So you need ERA5 data? We have some good news for you. The command line tool
[era5cli](http://era5cli.readthedocs.io/) lets you access all CDS ERA5 datasets
from the comfort of your terminal. In a single command you can download a
multitude of data to, say, validate your climate model, or observe the
consequences of wildfires on a variety of meteorological variables. Whatever
your use, if you need to use ERA5 data, this tool makes accessing it a breeze.

If that is all you needed to be convinced of its benefits, then here is how it
works:
1. [Register](https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu/user/register?destination=%2F%23!%2Fhome)
    at the Copernicus Climate Data Service (CDS), and store the key on your
    machine
1. Install the tool:

    ```bash
    pip install era5cli
    ```

1. Run the tool:

    ```bash
    era5cli monthly --variables temperature --startyear 2008
    ```

    (Or any other combination of variables, years, frequency, dataset,
    statistics… the sky is the limit — or, to be fair, pressure level 1000 is.
    Check [the
    documentation](https://era5cli.readthedocs.io/en/latest/instructions.html#running-era5cli-from-the-command-line)
    for all available options.)

Want to get started? [era5cli.readthedocs.io](http://era5cli.readthedocs.io/)
has all the details.

Not sure yet? Here are five reasons why era5cli is awesome.

### #1: You can access all ERA5 datasets currently available

The main power of era5cli lies in, well, ERA5.  Let’s not take the main credit
here: ERA5 data is why the tool exists and why we think you should use it. ERA5
represents the state of the art in global reanalysis data. In layman's terms:
the best estimate we have of past weather for each location in the world.
[Copernicus](https://www.copernicus.eu/en) is adding datasets to the collection,
so its power keeps increasing, and era5cli has been keeping up: all current
available datasets, from the (preliminary) back-extension stretching all the way
back to 1950, to the recently added ERA5-Land data, can be downloaded with
era5cli.

![Diagram of the family of ERA5 datasets]({{ site.url
}}/assets/ERA5_timeline.png) *Diagram of the family of ERA5 datasets as loaded
on 2021-03-11 via
[ECMWF](https://confluence.ecmwf.int/display/CKB/The+family+of+ERA5+datasets).*

While Copernicus tries to make things easier through a web-interface that
compiles your API request (more on that later) based on boxes you tick, the
multitude of datasets currently available translates to
[a](https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu/cdsapp#!/dataset/reanalysis-era5-pressure-levels-preliminary-back-extension?tab=overview)
[multitude](https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu/cdsapp#!/dataset/reanalysis-era5-pressure-levels-monthly-means-preliminary-back-extension?tab=overview)
[of](https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu/cdsapp#!/dataset/reanalysis-era5-land?tab=overview)
[such](https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu/cdsapp#!/dataset/reanalysis-era5-land-monthly-means?tab=overview)
[interfaces](https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu/cdsapp#!/dataset/reanalysis-era5-pressure-levels?tab=overview).

**The command line tool tries to keep things simple:** adding a `--land` flag is
the only thing required to access ERA5-Land data; a `--prelimbe` flag gets you
data from the preliminary back extension. Everything else stays the same.

The latest release of era5cli gives you access to the currently available data,
and the team behind era5cli is actively maintaining the tool so you do not have
to wait when more data becomes available. Make sure to use the latest release to
get up-to-date functionality: you can update era5cli with `pip install era5cli
--upgrade`.

### #2: No more wrestling with the API

ERA5 data is downloadable via the CDS API, an interface that defines the
commands and conventions to get access to the information available. This
already makes life easier than pressing buttons for a download. Potentially, an
API is the difference between clicking, scrolling, and drag-and-dropping to
eternity — and pressing 'enter', then sitting back with some coffee while your
data is collected. The CDS API has a client implemented in Python, which can be
used in a Python script to request ERA5 data directly.

Unfortunately, navigating an API is not without its challenges. Using the CDS
API Python module requires basic Python knowledge at the very least, and most
likely still a fair bit of clicking, scrolling, and copy-pasting from the CDS
website to generate a valid request. And, perhaps crucially, human mistakes are
bound to happen. Forgetting to change the name of the output file in your script
will retrieve a datafile with mystery content for future-you. Incorrect
combinations of options will send you into a back-and-forth of cryptic error
messages, or worse, it will still download data, but leave you in the dark about
the actual request that was fulfilled.

**With era5cli, by contrast, you only need to access the command line.** You
list the data you want, using the bare minimum of info. The tool checks your
instructions, if necessary informs you of any impossible combinations,
formulates the correct request, calls the CDS API, and saves your data in a
standardized format and with a clear file name that corresponds to the request.

Does that sound vague? Here is an example of a Python script that requests
monthly temperature data in 2010, across all pressure levels, and saves it as a
netcdf file:

```python
import cdsapi

c = cdsapi.Client()

c.retrieve(
    'reanalysis-era5-pressure-levels-monthly-means',
    {
        'format': 'netcdf',
        'product_type': 'monthly_averaged_reanalysis',
        'variable': 'temperature',
        'pressure_level': [
           '1', '2', '3',
           '5', '7', '10',
           '20', '30', '50',
           '70', '100', '125',
           '150', '175', '200',
           '225', '250', '300',
           '350', '400', '450',
           '500', '550', '600',
           '650', '700', '750',
           '775', '800', '825',
           '850', '875', '900',
           '925', '950', '975',
           '1000',
       ],
        'year': '2010',
        'month': [
            '01', '02', '03',
            '04', '05', '06',
            '07', '08', '09',
            '10', '11', '12',
        ],
        'time': '00:00',
    },
    'era5_temperature_2010_monthly.nc')
```

Here is what that same request looks like when made via era5cli on the command
line:

```bash
era5cli monthly --variables temperature --startyear 2010
```

Yup. That’s it.

### #3: You can automate with ease

Because of the simplicity of making a call to the CDS via era5cli, it is easily
incorporated in a script. Any language that can access the command line can use
the tool, which means that you are not dependent on Python to automate your
downloads. **Use your language of choice and include the era5cli command line
call in your script.**

Furthermore, choosing different types of data to download is easy in the
structured input that era5cli requires. Downloading multiple variables and years
is a breeze in a single command (see point #4), but also downloading both hourly
and monthly data merely require switching out these terms in the era5cli call,
while under the hood they request data from different datasets with their own
complicated name and product type.

### #4: Customize output in a single command

Do you want to download the data from multiple variables over several decades?
era5cli has you covered, and it’s easy as 1, 2, 3. **Multiple parameters can be
placed in the same call**, which will then download their data to a series of
output files. Multiple years can be included easily using the `--startyear` and
`--endyear` flags, which splits the data into multiple output files, one per
year — or combine them, with the use of the `--merge` flag. Whether you want to
download precipitation data in january of 2006, or everything snow-related from
1980 to now? The download may take longer, but your effort will be the same.

Also, pst, here's a little trick: run

```bash
era5cli info 2Dvars | grep "snow"
```

to quickly see what variables contain the word 'snow', so you can include them
in your call. Instead of `2Dvars` you can of course also search the other
variable options; check `era5cli info -h` to see what they are.

### #5: You can contribute!

era5cli is an open source effort, and welcomes your contribution! Is there a new
feature that we’ve missed? [Tell us about
it](https://github.com/eWaterCycle/era5cli/issues)! Do you know how to add it
yourself? [Even better](https://github.com/eWaterCycle/era5cli/pulls)! **Our team
is maintaining the software actively, and is very happy to hear from you.**
